well the war is taking a devastating
toll on Palestinian women and children
in Gaza more than 50,000 women in Gaza
are pregnant
5,500 of them are expected to give birth
this month but it's unclear how they can
reach hospitals through a war zone and
can get the care they need these women
are facing life-threatening challenges
as a result of Israel's unrelenting
bombardment of Gaza some women are
reportedly being forced to have
C-section deliveries in the dark and
without anesthesia others have suffered
miscarriages triggered by the trauma of
trying to survive Israel's war hospitals
are on the brink of collapse and
thousands of expectant mothers don't
know how or where they will give birth
let's speak to Lea Baker about this
she's the Arab states Regional director
at the United Nations population fund
unfpa and she's joining us from Cairo
Egypt Lea thank you very much for being
with us so even as the war goes on as
the war rages children are still being
born in Gaza what has it been like for
pregnant women and and young mothers in
the midst of this
conflict well I think you summed it up
really well um in your first statement
The Continuous bombardment the collapse
of the Health Care System the UN
insecurity and lack of safety even for
the hospital personnel and medical
personnel who still remain uh available
are being overwhelmed Med by the number
of casualties for a woman who's pregnant
and there are 5,500 estimated right now
in Gaza most of them now displaced in
the South they're facing an untenable
Choice risk whatever delivery comes in
uh the place where they reside and risk
bombardment or try to make it to one of
the reasonably functioning uh Health
Facilities
where it is overcrowded unhygienic and
where if they require a C-section the
anecdotal evidence coming in right now
um has been that many of those have been
without an anesthesia and where women
have to walk home including downstairs
and also face unsafe conditions as they
return to um the overcrowded shelters I
can't imagine as a woman myself being
faced with that kind of choice where
you're trying to bring life into this in
this world bring joy a new family member
and yet you're traumatized you're
fearful for yourself for your child and
this is why we are requesting
unconditionally that there be protection
and access for women and their safety
ensured as they get to the hospitals
that the hospitals are not a target of
any bombardment and that all of the
Health Care Professionals who are in
Gaza remain protected from any kind of
uh hostility or aggression in the last 3
and a half weeks none of that has been
secured indeed and it is pregnant women
of course and you've described there
some very difficult conditions that they
have to go through no prematernal health
care and very complicated deliveries but
it's also young girls right who are
facing trauma and are having to deal
with you know many health issues as well
what do they need most in in the midst
of this humanitarian
catastrophe right now at unfpa we are
very concerned for what is over half the
population women and girls pregnant
women adolescent girls who get their
period who are in overcrowded what they
call shelters but are actually any place
that is a school a friend's house that
Still Remains unsafe they need water
they need protection they need um to be
able to have hygiene for themselves and
for us it's very important can you
imagine being an adolescent girl in the
midst of all of this where she is trying
in a very crowded shelter to access um a
a toilet for a shower or a change of
clothing or if she has her period where
there is no sanitation no sanitary and
hygiene products and so you and FPA is
very focused on ensuring that we get the
medications the supplies and the hygiene
products to the people most in need and
those are the women and girls but but
how are you able to get these supplies
in right now when the war is still going
on and when we're seeing even in the
last few minutes un Vehicles being
targeted how can you get these supplies
to these young girls who need
them it is very dangerous for us at the
moment and there has only been a trickle
of supplies which is why access and
protection are the two main concerns for
us we do have supplies pre-positioned we
have been requesting for over three
weeks to be able to move those supplies
in regular and consistent safe modality
to the people in need and to call for
the cessation of the bombardment so that
we can deliver those in the meantime we
have through our partners in Gaza been
able to get a small amount of those to
the women in need in some of the places
uh in Gaza we continue to rely on the
partners the local market um and the
Goodwill of everyone who wants to see
the protection of that civilian
population to be able to deliver to the
best of our abilities but it is it is a
very fall it is very far from what we we
require indeed Lea thank you so much for
painting that picture for us of what
women and adolescent girls in Gaza are
going through right now Leila Baker is
with the United Nations population fund
joining us there from
Cairo